# SensESP release process

This release process is loosely based on the git-flow model with a few
simplifications. Main differences are:

- Since releasing is a rapid process, long-lived release branches are not
  needed. Releases can be made directly from feature branches.
- `master` (or `main` in the future) is the unstable development branch.
- `latest` is the last released version. Releases must be tagged from
  this branch.

The release process has a lot of prerequisites, some of which are mentioned below:

- platformio command line tools
- terser (npm install -g terser)
- graphviz
- doxygen
- bump2version

The release process is as follows:

1. Create a new local feature branch `release_x.y.z` for the release.

2. Bump the project version number with [bumpversion](https://pypi.org/project/bump2version/).

   The development version should be `x.y.z-alpha`.
   To bump to `x.y.z`, use `bumpversion release`.
   To bump the major or minor version, use `bumpversion major` or `bumpversion minor`.

   Bump2version creates always a new commit with the new version number.

3. Update the autogenerated web UI files and doxygen documentation:

       scripts/update_autogen.sh
   
   New commits are generated for the updated files.

4. Push the changes to your local fork.

5. Verify that everything looks OK in your fork.

   Any release testing should happen now at this point.

6. Once everything is fine, create a PR against the `latest` branch.
   
   Merge it.

7. Navigate to https://github.com/SignalK/SensESP/releases and click on 
   "Draft a new release". Tag version is "x.y.z". Be sure to select `latest`
   branch. Title is ordinarily "Version x.y.z". Description would ideally
   be a listing of new features and bugfixes.

7. Notify PlatformIO about the new release. This command may create a new 
   package based on your current worktree contents, so you need to clean your
   worktree or create a new one:

    git clean -df  # make sure you don't have any unchecked files you don't want to lose!
    platformio package publish --owner SignalK

   You need suitable permissions to run the `pio package publish` command. If
   you don't have them, ask Matti Airas <mairas@iki.fi> for assistance.

8. All that remains is to update the master branch. Create a new `release_x.y.z_to_master` branch based
   on `latest`. Run
   
       bumpversion patch

   to bump the version to `x.y.z+1-alpha`.

   Push the new branch to your own fork,
   create a PR against `master` and merge it.
